From its very beginnings the Internet became a crucial part of each and any infrastructure. Similar to the discoveries of electricity, microorganisms or elementary particles, the creation of the Internet has turned a new page in the history of humanity.

The history of the Internet has begun in the middle of the 20th century as a result of rapid development of computer science. Computers of that age were still relatively underperforming and needed constant maintenance. Some kind of an effective and automated method of time-sharing between users needed to be devised and implemented for them to work reliably.

The first idea that had emerged from that necessity was a concept of multi-tasking. Nowadays we don’t pay much attention to the fact that our computers perform many tasks at once, and that with our computers we can, for example, work and listen to music at the same time. But in the 1950s this idea turned out to be revolutionary.

The second idea would be a proposition to merge multiple computers into a single network. Each participant1 of such a network would be able to exchange data with the others. But the exact mechanism of implementation was still largely a mystery. Roughly for ten years the scientists were developing and discarding all kinds of ideas, one after another, preserving those that could be at least somewhat handy bit by bit. This is how the prototypes of packet exchange protocols (as well as the concept of a data packet itself) came to be.

In 1969 a duo of American engineers, Robert Taylor and Lawrence Roberts, have made a presentation to the U. S. Department of Defence with a project dubbed2 ARPANET (which stands for Advanced Research Projects Agency Network) founded on the previous research. Even more advanced networks have started to develop based on this one, including what would be later known as ‘networks of networks’. These researches have culminated with the emergence3 of two main network protocols (TCP and IP), which are still used as of today with some modifications.

A modern solution that eventually replaced ARPANET was called NSFNET, which was the National Science Foundation Network. This particular network has adopted the TCP/IP protocol as its main one, and also helped the emergence of the Domain Name System (DNS). And thus when the 1990s have arrived, the Internet architecture as we know it was largely in place.

One should make a distinction between terms ‘the Internet’ and ‘the World Wide Web’. The first one relates to the network architecture in itself4. The second one is more of a modern development and constitutes an interface that allows the access to a network for a user. It emerged in 1990 courtesy of CERN scientists, Tim Berners-Lee in particular. He was the inventor of terms such as HTTP, HTML, and also of a web browser.

In 2020 nearly 4,5 billion people are using the Internet both for work and communication. The Internet is a cornerstone of all modern banking, of the vital infrastructure automated systems, and also of many computer science branches. This promising technology still continues its development nowadays, and for now we can’t even fathom5 what new discoveries this further development can bring.


A Beautiful Mind

Game theory can be explained broadly as a study of behaviour of rational beings in cooperative and non-cooperative decision making. It’s a relatively new field of science that emerged in the second half of the 20th century. Globalization of economics, advent of nuclear weaponry and emergence1 of computers were all major milestones in the history of humanity, and each subsequently2 dictated the need to formalize at least the most common trade and war strategies.

A game is usually defined as a process involving two or more actors3, each of them having something to gain or lose through their actions after the game is finished (or ‘solved’). Thus, the definition applies to most of the regular games (like, for example, poker), but can be broadened as necessary to cover multitudes of other situations, both real and hypothetical. The action is presumed to be taken by a ‘rational agent’ - that is, an actor that acts consistently and always chooses an action that is the most optimal in terms of loss/gain ratio according to his current position. A game can be cooperative or non-cooperative, allowing or disallowing willing alliances between the participants respectively.

The study of cooperative games usually focuses on why and how the coalitions form, and what actions the members of any coalition would take at any given time. The study of non-cooperative games instead focuses on individual players and on finding a solution called Nash equilibrium4.

Nash equilibrium is a state of a game in which no player, knowing the strategies of other players, can change his own strategy to better his own odds while the other strategies are unchanged. Essentially, this means that all of the players have found the best possible (or ‘optimal’) outcome of the game for themselves, given the current rules and circumstances. Mathematician John Forbes Nash, who was an author of the concept, proved that this equilibrium is possible to find for any finite game.

One of the most famous examples of finding Nash equilibrium is a thought experiment called Prisoner’s dilemma. Suppose there are two prisoners interrogated5 in two different prison cells. They have no way to communicate with each other, but each of them knows that the other is also interrogated. Each prisoner is sentenced to one year in prison. Each prisoner is then offered a deal: if he testifies6 against the other, he is set free, while the other gets a harsher, 3-year penalty. However, if both prisoners testify against each other, both of them will get a harder sentence, and both will serve 2 years in prison. Each prisoner can choose either to testify or to remain silent. What is the optimal course of action for each prisoner?

According to game theory, a rational actor would choose to leave prison, condemning7 the other prisoner. Thus Nash equilibrium in this situation (and the most optimal outcome) would be reached if both prisoners tried to betray each other and subsequently each served 2 years.

Knowledge that in any situation with something to gain or lose there is indeed an optimal course of action with maximized profits for any and all participants has very wide implications8. Finding it might be hard, but the willingness to do that, perhaps, can make us able to stop the wars and other major threats to our society.

For his works in game theory, John Nash was awarded a Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences back in 1994, 45 years after actually writing them down. As of 2020, Nash is the only person ever to be awarded both this prize and the Abel Prize in mathematics, which he was awarded in 2015.
